Anesthesiology. 2004 May;100(5):1065-71.

Effects of subanesthetic ketamine on regional cerebral glucose metabolism in
humans.

Långsjö JW, Salmi E, Kaisti KK, Aalto S, Hinkka S, Aantaa R, Oikonen V, Viljanen 
T, Kurki T, Silvanto M, Scheinin H.

Author information: 
Turku PET Centre, University of Turku, and the Department of Anesthesiology and
Intensive Care, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The authors have recently shown with positron emission tomography
that subanesthetic doses of racemic ketamine increase cerebral blood flow but do 
not affect oxygen consumption significantly. In this study, the authors wanted to
assess the effects of racemic ketamine on regional glucose metabolic rate (rGMR) 
in similar conditions to establish whether ketamine truly induces disturbed
coupling between cerebral blood flow and metabolism.
METHODS: 18F-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose was used as a positron emission
tomography tracer to quantify rGMR on 12 brain regions of interest of nine
healthy male volunteers at baseline and during a 300-ng/ml ketamine target
concentration level. In addition, voxel-based analysis was performed for the
relative changes in rGMR using statistical parametric mapping.
RESULTS: The mean +/- SD measured ketamine serum concentration was 326.4+/-86.3
ng/ml. The mean arterial pressure was slightly increased (maximally by 16.4%)
during ketamine infusion (P < 0.001). Ketamine increased absolute rGMR
significantly in most regions of interest studied. The greatest increases were
detected in the thalamus (14.6+/-15.9%; P = 0.029) and in the frontal
(13.6+/-13.1%; P = 0.011) and parietal cortices (13.1+/-11.2%; P = 0.007).
Absolute rGMR was not decreased anywhere in the brain. The voxel-based analysis
revealed relative rGMR increases in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices.
CONCLUSIONS: Global increases in rGMR seem to parallel ketamine-induced increases
in cerebral blood flow detected in the authors' earlier study. Therefore,
ketamine-induced disturbance of coupling between cerebral blood flow and
metabolism is highly unlikely. The previously observed decrease in oxygen
extraction fraction may be due to nonoxidative glucose metabolism during
ketamine-induced increase in glutamate release.

PMID: 15114201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
